---
title: "[archive] Environments & Go"
date: "2014-05-20"
author: "chrsm"
---

_I recently found this extremely old post. It's not particularly relevant
anymore, but history is history._

---

Every once in a while when I set up a new [Go](http://golang.org) project, I
forget how exactly I had set up my previous project's environment to just
"work" how I desire it to. 

Hopefully this post helps you, too.

--------------------

Like many, I was initially excited that Go (almost) forces a strict environment
setup: you put code in a [workspace](http://golang.org/doc/code.html), and
Go behaves as you expect it to. Trying to fight against it can be the source
of a few well-earned headaches - it's not what you're *supposed to do*. Thus,
I don't *really* recommend you do so until you've become comfortable with the
toolchain.

Having been spoiled by PHP's Composer and Python's pip + virtualenv,
Go's built-in management of packages tends to become cumbersome after you've
written a few tools and need to "freeze" them along with their dependencies.

There are currently a huge number of solutions for managing third-party
dependencies. I have personally chosen [gvp](https://github.com/pote/gvp)
and [gpm](https://github.com/pote/gpm). They are both simple shell scripts.

gvp
----

`gvp` manages your `$GOPATH`. Running `gvp init` results in a .godeps directory
and a few sub-directories.

`gvp in` sets `$GOPATH` to the .godeps directory.

gpm
-------------------
`gpm` is responsible for actually "managing" dependencies. You create a `Godeps`
file, which looks like:

    github.com/chrsm/gunfuddle 29cc92e55516a1131b25272a2a64b11ec5c639a0
    github.com/other/dependency TAG
    ...etc

and then use `gpm install`, which uses `go get` under the hood to install the packages,
and then it checks out the revision you pointed to in your `Godeps` file.


fatih/vim-go
-------------------
Fatih developed a one-stop plugin for writing Go in vim. It contains a handful of useful
Go tools and other goodies like UtilSnips integration.


Multiple Go versions
--------------------

I also use a tool called [gvm](https://github.com/moovweb/gvm) to manage my actual
core Go installation. With gvm, I can install multiple versions of Go and switch between
them with no hassle.

Making "intellisense" play nice
---------------------------
nsf wrote [gocode](https://github.com/nsf/gocode), an autocomplete daemon for Go code.
It's absolutely fantastic. It works 100% perfectly when you have a standard Go workspace.
Even when you don't, it seems to work well for the most part as the server now accepts
path-related information from the client.

If you, like me, do not have a standard setup - you'll want to make sure you `go install -v package` *after*
you run `gpm install`, so that Go will build files that gocode actually reads in order
to give you feedback.
