---
title: "Experimenting with LOVE2D: Part 1"
date: 2020-08-05
author: chrsm
---

Recently, I found an urge to make a game. I'm not going to talk about the
story/world building stuff here for now, just some of the technical aspects.

I have zero experience writing any type of game software, so I expect this to
be a project that takes forever. It is entirely possible that it never actually
becomes a reality, but for the time being I am actually having fun learning the
basics.

I _am_ interested in building the mechanics of the game from scratch, but am
_not_ interested in attempting to build an engine on my own. I know I need to
start small and use an engine that works for what I'm going for, but doesn't
require a team to get started.

### Finding LOVE

There were a lot of options, but ultimately I decided to build with [LOVE][1].
It checks a lot of boxes for me:

- open-source
- works on Linux and Windows
- has successful games built, isn't a "toy"
- has decent documentation
- scriptable - uses Lua for everything
- allows for FFI

I'm a big fan of Lua and use it for lots of small things, so it being
_the language_ to write in made me quite happy. As LOVE supports FFI,
I can drop in to other libraries as needed.


### The Boring Parts

I mainly write software that runs on servers and have only written desktop
GUIs in a very limited fashion. I've written a handful of JS, HTML and CSS,
but the browser handles all of that drawing/painting/etc for you.

Now I have to figure all of that out on my own.

While I would love (no pun intended) to dig in to this here, I want to share
some of the boring stuff I've been working on: packaging and testing.

### Packaging Assets

LOVE has [documentation on distribution][2] - ie how to package your game up
using `.love` files (zip) and subsequently how to include the engine along with
it. This allows you to package up the code as well as assets in one go.

I imagine that updates to a small game are perfectly fine to be distributed in
this fashion, but I wanted to try something a bit different as far as the
assets are concerned: custom packaging.

What I came up with was fairly simple: tiny packed files.

```
struct Package {
	u16 PatchID
	u32 Count
	Entity [Count]Entities
}

struct Entity {
	u32 Hash
	u32 Size
	byte [Size]Content
}
```

I wrote a simple packer in Go that takes a directory and handles asset
packaging from there.

On the LOVE side, I implemented a package set, loader, and entity types.

Package:
- open(): retrieve patch ID
- unpack(): unpack entities, only reading the hash and leaving an offset to
  where the file is stored on disk
- find(file): find a file by name - hashes the filename and matches entities
  against it; loads the file based on the offset

Set:
- load(base path, set name): scans base path for packages with the set name
  prefix, loading all of their patch IDs. Sorts by patch ID desc.
- find(file): calls package:find(file) on packages in desc order to only find
  the newest version of a given file.

The hope here is that subsequent updates to assets or code contained within
the packages can be dropped in by just downloading a new package file, rather
than an entire `.love` and executable.

_100% overkill_ for a game that doesn't even have an alpha build, but it's a
pet project :)


### Testing

As previously mentioned, I have zero experiencing building games. I do, however,
have experience writing software in general - and I hate manually testing things
that could instead be automated.

As I write code and explore the LOVE APIs, I have written a fair amount of
tests on the Lua side of things. For example, the set/package/entity idea above
each have their own tests.

Unfortunately, I don't quite have my local Lua install and LOVE's version in
sync. Lua, for example, doesn't have a way to scan a directory for files
without something like `luafs`, and I have not been successful in figuring out
how to include these kinds of packages with LOVE itself. I may learn how to do
that in the future, but I didn't want to focus on it too much and would rather
build the game. I worked around this by using `popen` and `find` on \*nix
and `dir` on Windows.

[luaunit][3] is a pure-Lua, easy to use test setup that aligns with what I'm
used to, so I plugged that in and wrote tests for the non-LOVE reliant code.
The problem was that anything using the LOVE APIs directly couldn't be tested
in an automated fashion.

I decided to hack around this by running tests _inside of LOVE_ itself.

Inside of `main.lua`, I came up with:

```lua
function love.load()
    ...

    if os.getenv("_RUN_LOVE_TESTS") == "Y" then
        local suite = require('tests.tests')
        local pprint = require('thirdparty.pprint')

        -- handle results from suite run, writing suite.output to a file,
        -- and showing a message box that indicates success or failure
        os.exit( ... )
    end
end
```

`tests/tests.lua` is a bit ugly, but it does the trick:

```lua
local lu = require('thirdparty.luaunit')

local is_in_love = os.getenv("_RUN_LOVE_TESTS") == "Y"
local love_only = {
	['test_pkg'] = true,
	['test_set'] = true,
	...
}

... file discovery code using popen for running tests outside of love

if not is_in_love then
    for i, v in ipairs(files) do
        if love_only[v] then
            print('skipping ' .. v .. ': requires LOVE')
            files[i] = nil
        end
    end
end

for i = 1, #files do
    local file = string.sub(files[i], 1, #files[i] - 4)
    if file ~= "tests" then
        require('tests.' .. file)
    end
end

if is_in_love then
    local suite = lu.LuaUnit.new()
    suite:runSuite()
    return suite
else
    os.exit(lu.LuaUnit.run())
end
```

With all of that set up, I can run both `lua tests/tests.lua -v` from the
terminal as well as run `_RUN_LOVE_TESTS=Y love src`. The non-pure-lua tests
will be executed within an actual instance of LOVE, allowing full access to any
APIs needed, and a log will be written so I can inspect failures.

### End.jpeg

That's it for now. I expect to write about LOVE again as I work on this, but
don't have any particular timeline envisioned. I'm still learning the ropes in
LOVE itself - as well as building sprites, maps, etc.

Hopefully there will be more to share in the future!

[1]: https://love2d.org
[2]: https://love2d.org/wiki/Game_Distribution
[3]: https://github.com/bluebird75/luaunit
